Seven Years and One Day:
Sketching the Evolution of Internet Traffic
Pierre Borgnat∗, Guillaume Dewaele∗, Kensuke Fukuda†, Patrice Abry∗ and Kenjiro Cho‡
∗ CNRS, Univ. Lyon, Lab. Physique ENS Lyon, France. Email: {firstname.lastname}@ens-lyon.fr
† National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan / PRESTO, JST. Email: kensuke@nii.ac.jp
‡Internet Initiative Japan, Tokyo, Japan. Email: kjc@iijlab.net
Abstract—This contribution aims at performing a longitudinal
study of the evolution of the traffic collected every day for
seven years on a trans-Pacific backbone link (the MAWI dataset).
Long term characteristics are investigated both at TCP/IP layers
(packet and flow attributes) and application usages. The analysis
of this unique dataset provides new insights into changes in traffic
statistics, notably on the persistence of Long Range Dependence,
induced by the on-going increase in link bandwidth. Traffic in the
MAWI dataset is subject to bandwidth changes, to congestions,
and to a variety of anomalies. This allows the comparison of their
impacts on the traffic statistics but at the same time significantly
impairs long term evolution characterizations. To account for this
difficulty, we show and explain how and why random projection
(sketch) based analysis procedures provide practitioners with an
efficient and robust tool to disentangle actual long term evolutions
from time localized events such as anomalies and link congestions.
Our central results consist in showing a strong and persistent long
range dependence controlling jointly byte and packet counts. An
additional study of a 24-hour trace complements the long-term
results with the analysis of intraday variabilities.
Keywords: Traffic Analysis; Longitudinal study; Sketch; Robust
estimation; LRD
I. INTRODUCTION
The Internet is a fast evolving world, or beast, an implicit
corrolary often stated being that its robust and sustainable analysis
and modeling are impossible and that obtained results may
prove to be outdated before being published. This contribution
investigates some of the realities beyond this statement and
proposes both methodological tools and objective elements of
answers to shed light on these issues. We conduct longitudinal
analyses of traffic statistics long-term evolutions, for traces
collected every day, for 15 minutes, from 2001 to 2008, over
trans-Pacific backbone links (the MAWI repository, providing
publicly available anonymized traces [1]). Our first major
observation is that packet and protocol characteristics remain
stable along the years; on the application side, the changes
of the applications used on the Internet does not seem to
have a major impact on those characteristics. The statistics
of aggregated packet or byte count timeseries at the TCP/IP
layer are then analyzed, with focus on the evolutions with
time of their marginal distributions (MDs) and of long range
dependence (LRD). One key difficulty in performing statistical
longitudinal analysis is to disentangle smooth long term
0Work supported by Strategic International Cooperative Program between
CNRS (France) and JST (Japan). All data used are publicly available at
http://mawi.wide.ad.jp
evolution features from day-to-day fluctuations, as there is no
single day without anomalies or specific events. Therefore,
our first contribution consists of proposing a robust estimation
method based on sketches (random projections) [2], [3], that
enables long term analyses without being affected by specific
traffic conditions or anomalies. Applied to the 7-year long
datasets, this robust estimation procedure brings new insights
into the on-going debate related to bandwidth increase and
statistical multiplexing causing the disappearance of long
range dependence. The second contribution lies in finding
that, once the impacts of local events such as anomalies
and congestions are filtered out, the traffic statistics remain
stable along years with persistent LRD and MDs being well
modeled with Gamma laws. A concern with this longitudinal
study is that data last only 15 min., starting systematically at
2:00 pm. One may question the representativity w.r.t. both the
natural intra-day variability and short duration observations. To
address this, 24-hour traces were analyzed. We report results
for data collected on March 19th 2008, as part of the Day
in the life of the Internet project [4]. They confirm that the
proposed analysis yields robust conclusions, biased neither by
the specific schedule nor by short time measurements.
II. RELATED WORK
Longitudinal studies: Traffic analyses often consist of snapshot
studies of application behaviors, for instance, focused
on the impact of the latest killer application, likely to cause
changes in traffic statistical characteristics, e.g., web [5], P2P
[6], video streaming [7],... There have been fewer studies
quantifying the long term evolution of Internet traffic (statistics
and applications). One of them is based on NSFNET traces
(1988-1993) [8]. At that time, FTP and Mail accounted for
about half of the growing traffic volume, until web traffic
becomes majority. More recently [9], relations between packet
rate, bit rate, and traffic statistics are investigated based on
more than 4000 traces collected from 1998 to 2003. In
[10], traffic correlation structures before and after the web
emergence are compared, showing that web traffic affects at
least the finest time scales; however, evolution of longer range
correlations (such as LRD) is not reported. A recent study
focused on scanning activities on the LBL network for the
past 12 years [11].
Long Range Dependence: The discovery of LRD in Internet
traffic was epoch-making and raised fundamental issues
This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE INFOCOM 2009 proceedings.
978-1-4244-3513-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE 711
[12], [13]. Specifically, a characteristic related to LRD is the
high variability of traffic fluctuations, yielding degradations
of queueing performance [14]. Difficulties in empirically assessing
LRD in real traffic time series have been thoroughly
discussed [15]–[17], showing the relevance of a waveletbased
analysis framework [16]. However, stability (or even
existence) of LRD traffic is an ongoing debate and claims were
made predicting its disappearance on backbone or when loads
increase (cf. e.g., [18], [19]). A number of authors discussed
the fact that LRD in Internet traffic can be induced by higherlayer
protocols [10], [15], as well as related to the heavy tail
natures of the distributions of the file size to be transferred
[5], [12]. The (heavy)-tail behaviors of IP flow size have
been continuously investigated (see e.g., [20]). However, the
practical validity of the control of LRD of heavy-tail in actual
traffic has only been assessed in recent studies [21] as (heavy)-
tail behaviors of IP flow size is an elusive characteristic to
estimate. Therefore, we here concentrate only on proposing a
robust and reliable method, combining LD and sketches, to
evaluate the relevance of LRD.
III. MAWI DATASET
A. Monitoring point
The MAWI traffic repository archives traffic data collected
from the WIDE backbone networks. The WIDE network
(AS2500) is a Japanese academic network connecting universities
and research institutes. The MAWI repository has
been providing anonymized packet traces since 1999 (total
volume of available data exceeds 1TB as of April 2008, cf.
http://mawi.wide.ad.jp/ and [1]). A specific note
here is that the data used here are all publicly available on
the website.
Our main datasets are daily packet traces captured at
Samplepoint-B (hereafter B) from 2001/01 to 2006/06, then at
Samplepoint-F (hereafter F) from 2006/10 to 2008/03. These
are transit links of the WIDE network, and the link of B was
replaced in July 2006 by the link F. Traces just after the
upgrade are missing until 2006/10. At B, congestions were
frequently observed, the link was a 100Mbps, with 18Mbps
Committed Access Rate. The link for F is over-provisioned,
it started as a full 100Mbps link and upgraded to a 1Gbps
link with the capped bandwidth of 150Mbps in June 2007.
Daily packet traces are captured from 2:00 pm to 2:15 pm
everyday (Japanese Standard Time, UTC+9). The traces, with
anonymized IP addresses and without payloads, are made
available to the public along with a summary information web
page about the traffic. Occasionally, 24-hour or longer traces
are made captured. The 24-hour-long traces collected at F on
2008/03/19 is used in Sec. IV-E to show the consistency of
the obtained results. The WIDE transit link mostly carries
trans-Pacific commodity traffic between Japanese research
institutions and non-Japanese commercial networks, as WIDE
peers with most major domestic ASes at the Internet Exchange
Points it operates, and international traffic between academic
networks goes through other international research networks.
Traffic is also asymmetric as WIDE has other trans-Pacific
links, meaning that many flows can be observed in one
direction only. This compels us to study traffic separately for
each direction, labeled US2Jp, for traffic going to Japan, and
Jp2US, for outgoing traffic, as most traffic is between Japan
and the USA. The traffic is highly aggregated: A 15-minutelong
trace usually contains 300k-500k unique IP addresses,
and various kinds of anomalies.
Because the traces are taken on links used in real traffic
conditions, the ground truth is not always known about the
whys and whens for some specific events. For instance, there
is no control and only scarce explanation usually about why
the used bandwidth increases or not. One goal of this study
is to show that a proper methodology as proposed here gives
most of the information about what happened in a trace, both
in terms of statistics and flow or packet characteristics.
B. Throughput Evolution
Strong variability: Fig. 1 displays throughput evolutions, and
their intraday variabilities (measured as standard deviations
(STD) computed around 1s time window averages). A wide
range of throughput values and huge intraday variabilities
(STD varies by a factor of 10) are observed, together with
a global increase of throughput from 100 kbps in 2001 to
more than 12 Mbps in 2008. At B, the load steadily increases
over years up to the link capacity. The upgrade from B to F
induced a significant change in average throughput (currently
varying between 5 and 10 Mbps). The datasets enable then the
study of the evolution of the traffic over 7 years, under both
congested and over-provisioned conditions.
Congestion periods: B experienced several long lasting congestions
(shown in Fig. 1): US2Jp, from 2003/04 to 2004/10
and from 2005/09 to 2006/06; Jp2US, from 2005/09 to
2006/06. The byte throughput is close to constant with a low
level of fluctuations (80% drops in STD). Although drops
in STD are long in duration, they do not allow detection
of congestion, as short time fluctuations can locally have
amplitudes of same order.
Specific periods: Two periods with unusual traffic behavior
(gray-shaded areas in Fig. 1) call for specific comments. From
2003/05 to 2004/03, Jp2US traffic underwent a severe volume
decrease (Fig. 1, left). This had likely been caused by a
change in the routing policy or by upward link congestions.
Interestingly, despite this low volume, the traffic composition
and its statistical characterization have not been significantly
affected. From 2004/07 to 2005/04, US2Jp (Fig. 1, right),
strong fluctuations in packet number are observed (STD being
extremely high) due to massive activities of the Sasser worm
(see also Sec. III-C).
C. Protocol and Application Breakdown
Methodology: Protocols, applications and anomaly breakdowns
(shown in Fig. 2 for both directions) are first obtained
from classical procedures, using protocol breakdown then a
Port number based identification. Unknown port numbers are
found associated to dynamic ports larger than 1024. Those
packets were shown to be mostly linked to P2P hiding
